OSDOCS-19549: Instructions to enable plugins sans UI (#111266)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/proc_enabling-dynamic-plugin-using-cli.adoc

//Used in assembly deploy-plugin-cluster.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="enabling-a-dynamic-plugin-by-using-the-cli_{context}"]
= Enabling a dynamic plugin with the CLI

[role="_abstract"]

> You can enable a dynamic plugin to extend the core web console with more features, such as additional pages, perspectives, or dashboard items. Use the {oc-first} after a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. Add the `ConsolePlugin` name to `spec.plugins` in the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.

Reviewer: I'm not clear on what the second sentence means. Should the third sentence be in the short description? It is more of a how than a what or why. And, maybe save the details for the procedure?

```suggestion
You can enable a dynamic plugin to extend the core web console with more features, such as additional pages, perspectives, or dashboard items, by using a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. 

Then,  add the name of the plugin to the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.
```

Author: reviewed by 2 SMEs, QE, and Jeana

.Prerequisites
* You logged in to the cluster as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* You installed the dynamic plugin using a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm chart.
* A `ConsolePlugin` custom resource (CR) exists on the cluster.

.Procedure
. Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get consoleplugin
----
+
. Optional: View details for a specific `ConsolePlugin` resource by running the following commands:

> .. Set the plugin name as an environment variable:

Reviewer: Why not just add the plugin name to the `oc get consoleplugin plugin-name -o yaml` command and save a step?

Author: this is the code my engineers gave me after more than 1 pass, and approved by Jeana. thank you, @mburke5678!

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"
----
+
where `<plugin_name>` is the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource.
.. Verify the plugin details:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get consoleplugin "${PLUGIN_NAME}" -o yaml
----
+
The following example shows a `ConsolePlugin` YAML with the plugin listed in `spec.plugins`:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  plugins:
    - <plugin_name> 
    # ...
----
+

> Replace `<plugin_name>` with the name of your plugin.

Reviewer: This code block is example output, right? So you wouldn't replace the `plugin_name`, it would already be there, right? 

```suggestion
`<plugin_name>` is the name of your plugin.
```

Author: all the changes you see here around these code parts, @mburke5678, are per Jeana's comments.

//Used in assembly deploy-plugin-cluster.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="enabling-a-dynamic-plugin-by-using-the-cli_{context}"]
= Enabling a dynamic plugin using the CLI

[role="_abstract"]
You can enable a dynamic plugin using the OpenShift CLI (`oc`) after a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. Add the `ConsolePlugin` name to `spec.plugins` in the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.

.Prerequisites
* You logged in to the cluster as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* You installed the dynamic plugin using a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm chart.
* The installation created a `ConsolePlugin` custom resource (CR).

.Procedure
. Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource:
+
[source,terminal]
----
oc get consoleplugin
----
+
Optional: View details for a specific `ConsolePlugin` resource:
+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"

> oc get consoleplugin "${PLUGIN_NAME}" -o yaml

Reviewer 2: Please also include the snippet of the YAML that has the plugins listed as a pointer for how people can do this with GitOps

Author: thanks, @siamaksade! i asked you in Slack for clarification. specifically, I said:

do you mean something like this?

apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  plugins:
    - my-plugin

the procedure uses ${PLUGIN_NAME} as a placeholder throughout. for the YAML snippet, should the plugin name in the example be a real one (like the Serverless plugin name), or keep it generic w/a placeholder like my-plugin?

.Prerequisites
* You logged in to the cluster as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* You installed the dynamic plugin using a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm chart.
* The installation created a `ConsolePlugin` custom resource (CR).

.Procedure
. Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource:
+
[source,terminal]
----
oc get consoleplugin
----
+
Optional: View details for a specific `ConsolePlugin` resource:
+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"
oc get consoleplugin "${PLUGIN_NAME}" -o yaml
----
+
The following example shows a `ConsolePlugin` YAML with the plugin listed in `spec.plugins`:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  plugins:
    - <plugin_name> <1>
----
<1> Replace `<plugin_name>` with the name of your plugin. To find available plugin names, run `oc get consoleplugins`.
. Enable the dynamic plugin by adding the `ConsolePlugin` name to the console Operator configuration. 
+
[NOTE]
====
Make sure the Operator finishes installing the dynamic plugin before you run the following patch command.
====+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"

> oc patch console.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=json \

Reviewer 3: Looks like you missed the rest of the command. It's one command, but multiple lines continued using `\`

//Used in assembly deploy-plugin-cluster.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="enabling-a-dynamic-plugin-by-using-the-cli_{context}"]

> = Enabling a dynamic plugin using the CLI

Reviewer 4: Enabling a dynamic plugin byusing the CLI

<img width="1072" height="158" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c4061a72-efe7-4829-856d-ac4305cbb9bb" />

Author: Mine doesn't have "by." Enabling a dynamic plugin using the CLI...unless it's wrong somewhere else?

Author: oooohhhhhhh, it NEEDS the "by." yuck i don't like that at all. seems so redundant. i'll change. @dfitzmau

[role="_abstract"]

> You can enable a dynamic plugin using the OpenShift CLI (`oc`) after a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. Add the `ConsolePlugin` name to `spec.plugins` in the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.

Reviewer 3: @siamaksade @alimobrem Can you clarify the scenario where this instructions are meant to be used? For manually enabling a plugin, you would just edit the console operator config to add the plugin to the list. I'd expect this to be just for scripting the plugins. It's not clear to me that that's the case from the doc description here.

Reviewer 2: There are three ways that people generally modify OpenShift configurations:
1. UI: for one off per cluster changes
2. CLI: for scripted repeated changes 
3. GitOps: for automated multi-cluster changes

These instructions are meant for (2) and (3). The CLI command is for scenario 2 and the YAML snippet is for scenario 3.

> You can enable a dynamic plugin using the OpenShift CLI (`oc`) after a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. Add the `ConsolePlugin` name to `spec.plugins` in the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can enable a dynamic plugin by using the {oc-first} after a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. Add the `ConsolePlugin` name to `spec.plugins` in the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.
```

.Prerequisites
* You logged in to the cluster as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* You installed the dynamic plugin using a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm chart.
* The installation created a `ConsolePlugin` custom resource (CR).

.Procedure
. Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> oc get consoleplugin

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ oc get consoleplugin
```

Same for other commands.

https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#user-replaced-values-xml

Author: the $ is only before user-replaced values; surrounded by curly braces (and preceded by a dollar sign (${ })) @dfitzmau this isn't user replaced

----
+

> Optional: View details for a specific `ConsolePlugin` resource:

Reviewer 4: This might not be an Optional step as the name is needed in the next step.

Author: this is what the SME and QE asked for

Reviewer 5: Should probably be separated out as its own step, since it's not the same thing as step 1

+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"
oc get consoleplugin "${PLUGIN_NAME}" -o yaml
----
+
The following example shows a `ConsolePlugin` YAML with the plugin listed in `spec.plugins`:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  plugins:

>     - <plugin_name> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - <plugin_name>
    - 
# ...
```

<img width="1411" height="549" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2da6a5e9-4620-481a-b38c-7044a168a73d" />

>     - <plugin_name> <1>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - <plugin_name> <1>
# ...
```

If not a complete YAML.

Author: @dfitzmau can you clarify what you mean?

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#signs-and-symbols-in-code-blocks

----

> <1> Replace `<plugin_name>` with the name of your plugin. To find available plugin names, run `oc get consoleplugin`.

Reviewer 4: Remove callouts for DITA compliance.

Reviewer 4: Sorry, keep the text but follow one of the callout replacements:
[
plugin_nam](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1j78SA8Y-ZRlVATbVe6D8bdYj7mQzzhOJtGt1xH_3qa0/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.vsfnqm21wp0r)

. Enable the dynamic plugin by adding the `ConsolePlugin` name to the console Operator configuration. 
+
[NOTE]
====
Make sure the Operator finishes installing the dynamic plugin before you run the following patch command.
====
+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_PATCH=$(cat <<EOF
[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/plugins/-",

>     "value": "<plugin-name>"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    "value": "<plugin_name>"
```

As per https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#user-replaced-values

> if [ -z "${existing}" ] || [ "${existing}" = "null" ]; then

Reviewer 3: In practice, I'd expect this list never to be empty since we have out of the box plugins, but maybe we should leave it for completeness just in case.

  }
]
EOF
)
oc patch consoles.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=json -p "${PLUGIN_PATCH}"
----

.Verification
. Confirm that the console Operator configuration includes the `ConsolePlugin` name:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> oc get console.operator.openshift.io cluster -o jsonpath='{.spec.plugins}{"\n"}'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ oc get console.operator.openshift.io cluster -o jsonpath='{.spec.plugins}{"\n"}'
```

>     -p "[{\"op\":\"add\",\"path\":\"/spec/plugins/-\",\"value\":\"${PLUGIN_NAME}\"}]"

Reviewer 3: Honestly... this one line might be all we need? If we don't have to handle the missing spec.plugins case (which I don't think we do). Instead of a whole script, we might be able to document this one line.

Reviewer 2: Agree with @spadgett that the patch command is the essense of what the CLI instruction needs to contain, provided it calls out that admin should wait until an operator installs the dynamic plugin before enabling it

----

. Refresh the {product-title} web console.
+
The console can take a few minutes to apply the updated configuration.

[role="_additional-resources"]
.Additional resources

> * https://github.com/openshift/console/tree/main/dynamic-demo-plugin#enabling-the-plugin[Upstream demo instructions for enabling a plugin]

Reviewer 4: We're not supposed to link to GitHub resources for security resources. Assuming these resources are owned by Red Hat?

https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#external-links

Consider giving doc user a signal that the links point to a GitHub repo:

Helm template that patches the console Operator configuration (GitHub)

Author: yes owned by Red Hat. so it IS ok to include? @dfitzmau

//Used in assembly deploy-plugin-cluster.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="enabling-a-dynamic-plugin-by-using-the-cli_{context}"]
= Enabling a dynamic plugin with the CLI

[role="_abstract"]

> You can enable a dynamic plugin by using the {oc-first} after a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm-based install. Add the `ConsolePlugin` name to `spec.plugins` in the console Operator configuration (`console.operator.openshift.io/cluster`) so the web console loads it.

Reviewer 5: Is there more you could say about _why_ the user does this? Like what the actual goal is, why they would want to enable a dynamic plugin

.Prerequisites
* You logged in to the cluster as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* You installed the dynamic plugin using a scripted installation, such as an Operator or Helm chart.

> * The installation created a `ConsolePlugin` custom resource (CR).

Reviewer 5: if this is talking about the OCP installer, it's:
```suggestion
* The installation program created a `ConsolePlugin` custom resource (CR).
```

idk if this is referring to something else tho, disregard if incorrct

.Procedure

> . Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource:

Reviewer 4: This is a command:

Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource by entering the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get consoleplugin
----

The dollar sign is needed: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#commands-with-root-privileges

> . Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Confirm the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get consoleplugin
----
+
Optional: View details for a specific `ConsolePlugin` resource:
+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"

> oc get consoleplugin "${PLUGIN_NAME}" -o yaml

Reviewer 5: This appears to be two CLI steps. We can only have one command per block, and these commands are not formatted how we require either. This should be broken into two steps (1. set an env var, 2. use the env var to get details?) and each should be formatted as a command (i.e. `$` prompt etc)

----
+
The following example shows a `ConsolePlugin` YAML with the plugin listed in `spec.plugins`:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  plugins:
    - <plugin_name> 
    # ...
----
+

> Replace `<plugin_name>` with the name of your plugin. To find available plugin names, run `oc get consoleplugin`.

Reviewer 5: Consider moving this info up to the first time you mention `<plugin_name>` around line 27 so they find it easily. Something like:

```
.. Set an environmental variable for the `ConsolePlugin` resource name by running the following command:
[source,terminal]
----
$ PLUGIN_NAME="<plugin_name>"
----
+
where `<plugin_name>` is the name of the `ConsolePlugin` resource.
```

. Enable the dynamic plugin by adding the `ConsolePlugin` name to the console Operator configuration. 
+
[NOTE]
====
Make sure the Operator finishes installing the dynamic plugin before you run the following patch command.
====
+
[source,terminal]
----
PLUGIN_PATCH=$(cat <<EOF
[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/plugins/-",
    "value": "<plugin_name>"
  }
]
EOF
)

> oc patch consoles.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=json -p "${PLUGIN_PATCH}"

Reviewer 5: Same as above - this is two commands stuck in one CLI block (one to set an env var, one to use it in a patch command). They need to be separated into two CLI blocks and formatted accordingly.

----

.Verification

> . Confirm that the console Operator configuration includes the `ConsolePlugin` name:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Confirm that the console Operator configuration includes the `ConsolePlugin` name by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get console.operator.openshift.io cluster -o jsonpath='{.spec.plugins}{"\n"}'
----

. Refresh the {product-title} web console.
+
The console can take a few minutes to apply the updated configuration.

[role="_additional-resources"]
.Additional resources
* https://github.com/openshift/console/tree/main/dynamic-demo-plugin#enabling-the-plugin[Upstream demo instructions for enabling a plugin]

> * https://github.com/openshift/console-plugin-template/blob/3a06152cffdd10ad9654b6b607cb00a055f29733/charts/openshift-console-plugin/templates/patch-consoles-job.yaml[Helm template that patches the console Operator configuration]

Reviewer 5: We need PX approval for these. I think Kathryn also mentioned in Slack that this second link would not be valid, though idk their reasoning
